---
layout: page
title: Research
---

I am a quantitative plant ecologist with skills in field ecology, statistical and geospatial modeling, and ecoinformatics.  The overarching question addressed by my research is: How does environmental heterogeneity influence plant diversity across spatial and temporal scales?  I address this question by applying quantitative models to data on plant community dynamics, diversity patterns, functional traits, and evolutionary relationships to test hypotheses and improve the predictive power of models.  I am particularly interested in tropical forests because they pose particularly interesting questions regarding the origin and maintenance of diversity, they provide immensely important ecosystem services, and because they are highly vulnerable to risks of climate change and anthropogenic land-use change.  While I am fascinated by ‘big picture’ questions in ecology, I also strive to make my work relevant for conservation and management.  Besides collecting original field data, I regularly work with and synthesize large, existing datasets (e.g., permanent forest plot data, GBIF, TRY, and herbaria collections).  I also deeply enjoy collaborating with a diverse network of researchers.  I am actively involved with several large research networks based in Europe, Latin America, and the United States.

My research programme can be organized into three main themes:

### Joint effects of abiotic and biotic conditions on plant diversity and dynamics
A central goal in ecology is to identify the role of biotic interactions in shaping species distributions and community dynamics. One major challenge is separating the potentially confounding effects of abiotic environmental variation and local biotic interactions.  Ultimately, predicting species and community-level responses to environmental change requires a solid understanding of the interactive effects of abiotic conditions and biotic interactions.

To address these issues, I incorporate dynamic demographic data with information on species’ functional traits and evolutionary histories to infer mechanisms underlying patterns of diversity, species distributions, and demographic performance across abiotic gradients.  My PhD research, for example, focused on functional and phylogenetic dimensions of tree diversity in Puerto Rico. Through an intensive field campaign, I established a series of permanent forest plots, generated an extensive database of plant traits and occurrence records, and built a molecular phylogeny for Puerto Rican trees.  My main findings included (1) demonstrating variation in the nature of species interactions across the island’s precipitation, soil, and successional gradients, and (2) linking interspecific variation in functional traits with species geographic distributions.  Other work in this theme has involved dynamic demographic data on trees and seedlings from the Luquillo Long-Term Ecological Research Station.  For instance, I examined how abiotic and biotic conditions jointly influence the probability of successful seed-to-seedling transition.  Another recent project involved modeling how interannual climate variation interacts with local environmental heterogeneity to mediate survival of seedlings.
Several recent projects I initiated during my first postdoctoral fellowship also involve determining how tree performance (i.e., growth and survival) depends on the joint influences of abiotic conditions and an individual’s local biotic context (e.g., neighboring trees).  In one, for example, I used hierarchical Bayesian models and long-term data from permanent forest plots in Panama to quantify the effect of crowding on performance across a regional precipitation gradient.  The results of this study reveal how species traits mediate their sensitivity to local crowding, and how these effects depend on the abiotic context.

### Drivers of forest succession and implications for ecosystem services
Although second growth forests currently represent a majority of forests on Earth , they are often marginalized in the context of environmental policy and global vegetation models. Successfully integrating second growth forests into Earth systems models and future policy negotiations requires a better understanding of their dynamics, and the role they play in provisioning ecosystem services. 

As above, several projects under this theme emerged from my intensive work in Puerto Rico, which represents a fascinating case study for land-use change and successional dynamics of tropical forests.  In one project, I used plant traits and a molecular phylogeny to test hypotheses about the drivers of succession on the island.  I found support for various trait-mediated mechanisms governing successional dynamics of these forests.  Previously, another collaborative project examined the biophysical and socio-economic drivers of forest gain and loss in Puerto Rico over the past 50 years.  Going forward, I believe an important area of research is to combine ecological models of forest regrowth with models of anthropogenic land-use change in order to make more accurate projections and develop successful conservation plans for the future.
Another project in this theme (completed during my first postdoc) was to develop a novel approach to quantitatively partition the relative contributions of different demographic processes (i.e., recruitment, growth, and survival) to temporal shifts in the functional composition of plant communities.  This approach facilitates more direct tests of successional theory by elucidating the demographic mechanisms driving functional composition change.  Also during my first postdoc, I became involved with a large, international collaborative research network (2ndFor), which studies the implications of land-use change and forest succession for carbon dynamics and biodiversity of Neotropical forests.  Two companion papers from this group (published in Nature and Science Advances) focused on (1) estimating how variation in soil and climate conditions influence rates of carbon sequestration, (2) mapping the extent and age of Neotropical secondary forests, and (3) quantifying the potential carbon sequestration contributions from naturally regenerating secondary forests.

### Species ranges in the context of global environmental change
Developing robust predictions of species’ responses to climate change requires a comprehensive perspective on the processes that govern the structure and dynamics of species ranges. Critically, most current models of species distributions rely on an assumption of demographic equilibrium.  This assumption, however, is not well-supported because many processes (e.g., source-sink dynamics, biotic interactions, dispersal limitation) can decouple spatial patterns of abundance from demographic performance. Increasing the accuracy of models and projections requires improving the ways these processes are integrated into species distributions models.

Several of my research projects involve merging data on demographic performance at local scales with species abundance at regional scales to provide a more mechanistic view of species range dynamics and responses to environmental change.  For instance, I used data on Puerto Rican tree species occurrence patterns to link their functional trait strategies with their geographic distributions.  In other ongoing work, I am extending this analysis to more directly compare abundance patterns with to demographic rates of trees across environmental gradients.

Another major component of this theme involves developing software for open and reproducible modeling of species distributions.  For example, when working to develop robust methods for estimating species geographic ranges, I developed an R package (ENMeval) and tutorial that provides tools for creating and evaluating ecological niche models.  More recently, I have collaborated on the development of an open-source web application (Wallace) that guides users through various steps involved with processing data from large biodiversity databases (e.g., GBIF) to model species distributions.

### Ecological and evolutionary drivers of global patterns of palm dominance
The work I am conducting in my current position at Aarhus University is focused the ecological and evolutionary drivers of palm diversity and abundance.  Palms (Arecaceae) are dominant members of many tropical forests.  In fact, 7 of the top 20 ‘hyperdominant’ species in the Amazon basin are palms .  Surprisingly, we currently know little about the determinants of palm abundance patterns across large spatial scales.  Moreover, given the many morphological and physiological differences between palms and dicotyledonous trees, the responses of these groups to environmental change drivers (e.g., increasing frequency of drought) are likely to differ.  A better understanding of palm dominance will help identify knowledge gaps and ultimately improve the predictive ability of global vegetation models.

I recently initiated a set of projects with the following main objectives: (1) complete a quantitative analysis of global patterns in palm dominance, (2) review and synthesize existing hypotheses and evidence for the drivers of palm dominance, and (3) evaluate the consequences of palm dominance for biomass dynamics.  This work involves collaboration with researchers associated with a large network of forest plots coordinated by researchers the University of Leeds (i.e., www.forestplots.net).  I have nearly completed the data request phase of this project and will begin data analysis soon.  In total, I will be working with a pantropical dataset including >1,400 forest plots and millions of individual trees.  This project will be the first to quantitatively evaluate global patterns in palm dominance.  Ultimately, I will expand this work by investigating the extent to which palms respond differently than trees to climate drivers, and evaluating the implications of these differences in terms of biomass dynamics.

[link text goes here]({{url}}/pdfs/filename.pdf)
